
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1984 Jun;81(11):3302-6.

Cathepsin D-mediated processing of procollagen: lysosomal enzyme involvement in
secretory processing of procollagen.

Helseth DL Jr, Veis A.

The proteolytic removal of the extension COOH-terminal propeptide from
procollagen has been examined in vitro. A crude enzyme activity was identified in
a whole-chicken-embryo extract that acted at acid pH and appeared to be similar
to one identified previously [Davidson, J. M., McEneany , L. S. G. & Bornstein , 
P. (1979) Eur. J. Biochem. 100, 551-558]. This activity was inhibitable by
pepstatin but not by leupeptin, suggesting that it might be cathepsin D.
Cathepsin D was purified 907-fold from chicken livers by affinity chromatography 
on pepstatin-aminohexyl-Sepharose 4B and was found to remove the COOH propeptides
from procollagen. At pH 6.0, the site of cleavage appeared to shift from the COOH
telopeptide to the COOH telopeptide/propeptide junction, based upon the
difference in electrophoretic migration of the cleavage products, although
determining the actual cleavage site will require end-group analysis. A model for
the involvement of cathepsin D in the in vivo processing of procollagen is
presented.


PMCID: PMC345495
PMID: 6587351  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Biol Chem. 1981 Jul 25;256(14):7118-28.

Collagen self-assembly in vitro. Differentiating specific telopeptide-dependent
interactions using selective enzyme modification and the addition of free amino
telopeptide.

Helseth DL Jr, Veis A.

The thermally induced in vitro self-assembly of collagen molecules to form active
fibrils illustrates that collagen molecules themselves contain all of the
structural information necessary for assembly. The molecule contains three
structural domains, the NH2 and carboxyl-terminal extra helical regions (the
telopeptides) and the major triple helical rod-like domain. Proteolytic removal
of the short telopeptide domains drastically alters the in vitro self-assembly
process. We have examined the specific contributions of each telopeptide to the
initiation ("nucleation") and growth stages of self-assembly in collagens
modified by selective proteinase treatment and by isolating a peptide containing 
the amino telopeptide and adding this to both normal and proteinase-modified
collagen self-assembly systems. Pronase-modified collagen, devoid of both
telopeptides, initiated self-assembly very poorly. Addition of small amounts of
intact collagen accelerated the rate of nucleation of pronase-modified collagen. 
Addition of carboxypeptidase-modified collagen also accelerated the nucleation of
pronase-modified collagen, suggesting that the remaining amino telopeptide was
involved in nucleation. This was confirmed by isolating the cyanogen bromide
fragment of the alpha 1(I) subunit containing the amino telopeptide and finding
that it specifically accelerated the nucleation of intact pepsin- and
pronase-modified to collagens. The amino telopeptide appears to bind to a
specific region within the collagen triple helical domain. The isolated peptide
requires thermal pretreatment to be active; hence, this interaction must involve 
a unique telopeptide conformation. This behavior is compatible with the recent
model (Helseth, D. L., Jr., Lechner, J. H., and Veis, A. (1979) Biopolymers 18,
3005-3014) proposed for the conformation of the amino telopeptide and its
interaction with a helical receptor site as a step in nucleation. Comparison of
the behavior of leucine aminopeptidase- and carboxypeptidase-modified collagens
suggests that the carboxyl telopeptide has its major role in the growth stages of
self-assembly.


PMID: 7251588  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

